

# China’s 996 Work Culture 


## What Is 996?
In 2019, one of the hottest buzzwords in China that was constantly mentioned on Chinese social media was “996”. 

996 is a working culture popular in China’s technology industry. The meaning of 996 is working 9 AM to 9 PM, 6 days a week. The word 996 started from a tech startup company ‘Youzan’ in early 2019 when they officially announced that they would be adapting the 996 working schedule. 

In March 2019, a GitHub repository named “996ICU”[1] was created by Chinese programmers to fight against 996 culture. Although Youzan was the first company that brought the word to the public, 996 has been deeply entrenched in China’s tech industry for many years from small startups to big corporations such Alibaba, ByteDance, DJI, Huawei, Ant Finance, and among many others[2]. 996 has since then become a well-known representation of competitive culture in China’s tech industry.


## Why Did It Happen and Why Is It Still Happening?

### Lack of Government Enforcement
996 is an apparent violation of the labour law of China. The government has regulated that employees shall work no more than 44 hours a week[1]. However, in real-life situations, there is almost no government enforcement of such regulations. In 2019, when Youzan got criticized by the public for implementing a 996 working schedule, the government announced that they would step in and investigate. Early 2021, Li Guohuai, one of the members of the national committee, has pointed out that after 2 years since the beginning of the investigation, 996 did not get alleviated but has gotten worse[4]. Li proposed to have more strict enforcement on 996 culture. Would this be another “much said and little done” by the government? Very possible, as the formation of such a brutal working schedule did not happen overnight, it is hard to change it over a short period of time. 

The government should work on both the corporation side and the employee side. More supervision and punishment are needed for companies and employees should get more education on their labour rights. The government should be responsible for bringing awareness to employees’ rights as there is little chance that business corporations would do so.

### Unequal Power Actors
The relationship between the big tech companies and their employees is not equal. Companies own much more resources and power while employees do not have many choices other than taking legal actions. There have been cases of employees suing companies for overtime working and exploitation successfully, but the punishment was so little to a business corporation and it took so much effort for an individual to collect all the evidence and hire a lawyer.

When it comes to public opinion, although employees usually gain more support from social media and the general public, some big tech giants can control the media from the source and block the news. Powerful Public Relations departments in large companies are able to delete posts regarding negative news about the company. When “996ICU'' made it to the headline, there were multiple browsers that were owned by Chinese tech giants that immediately blocked the link. Public knowledge that leads to any form of solidarity is kept suppressed by big corporations.

To create a fair workplace for employees, companies need to enforce HR policies and strengthen their accountability. To balance out the unequal power relationship, third-party organizations such as representatives from the government, labour unions, or law firms should be introduced.

### Competitive Industry & Working Culture
With China’s recent year’s Internet boom, technology, and internet companies sprouted up across the nation, which resulted in fierce competition. Each area has multiple competitors trying to outdo other companies. In consequence, product and feature launching becomes more fast-paced. 

ByteDance, the company behind TikTok, is known as the app factory. ByteDance has a faster product iteration than other internet companies. A former ByteDance employee once said: 
“ByteDance recruits redundantly. Inside of the company, redundancy means everyone has to compete and fight. In ByteDance, idleness is a sign of death[7].” 

Another tech giant Huawei has a well-known “wolf culture” in which the company encourages employees to be ‘brutal’ and ‘fierce’ in order to reach the goal. It pushes employees to their limits and places workers in positions that are against each other rather than sharing successes. This is a destructive form of competition as trust and collaboration are much more needed for innovation.

Jack Ma, the founder of Alibaba has defended 996 on his personal blog. He stated: 
“If we find things we like, 996 is no longer a problem. For people who hate their work, every minute is torture ...  There are many 996 in the world including scientists and artists. It is because of such a group of 996, our country has gained worldwide attention in the past 40 years … I do not defend 996, I pay tribute to the strugglers. Everyone has the right to choose their lifestyle. It is understandable to choose a relaxing way of working and not willing to put in ‘superhuman effort’, but you will not experience the happiness and rewards brought by struggling[8].” 

Jack Ma has completely ignored the fact that 996 is self-destructing, it will burn out employees and take away their precious time with families. Without respect for employees' rights, the company will drive out the best talent. 

Why do so many Chinese companies like to sugar coat 996 with the concept of struggling and thriving? Because this has always been a virtue in Chinese culture. Such spirit reached its peak during the Great Leap Forward (1958 - 1962)[9] when Mao wanted to surpass western countries in a short period of time and encouraged over-production and surplus which did not actually exist. Chinese people believed that if they worked hard enough, and struggled to be strong, nothing was impossible. If they could produce more steel than the west, China could beat them in industrialization. This of course has been proved to be a wrong-headed policy that caused deaths and starvation. The concept of non-stop hard-working is still influencing generations of Chinese. Business owners still believe that the harder you work, the more successful you would get, which is not true and I will discuss more later.

Additionally, Chinese society stereotypes programmers. Many think younger programmers are more valuable than the older ones as they are more energetic and could adapt to new technology faster. Jiang Fan, CEO of Alibaba’s Taobao and Tmall businesses once required that all P8 level (equivalent to senior experts) employees should be below 35 years old[11]. He believes that programmers achieve full potential before that age. This becomes an indirect message telling people who are above 35 years old that they are useless. The only metrics he uses to value an employee becomes (a). the physical ability of the employee to keep up with the intense working hour demand and (b). ability to adapt to new information. Other metrics such as experience, discretion, insight, well-being, and leadership are undervalued. This also shows that he only cares about the company being successful and employee’s career development is not his business. In another way, he dehumanizes employees to only labour resources. The success of businesses does not mean the success of workers. Alibaba is indeed a successful company but that was built based on the exploitation of their employees’ health and energy.

The stereotype does not only exist within the tech industry but also in the general public who are heavily influenced by the news mentioned above. When I applied for university, I consulted a couple of my parents’ friends on what major I should choose, none of them suggested computer programming. There were mainly two reasons they gave:
(1). Women are not suitable to be a programmer because women have to take long parental leave and it is hard to catch up on new technology. Women also do not have the physical capability of men to do intense programming work. 
(2). When programmers get old, you will not be able to compete with younger people and you will fall behind and eventually get kicked out of the game.

The yoke of such misconception made millions of Chinese programmers questioning themselves if it’s worth it to work their fingers to the bone for companies that do not even respect their basic rights.

### Competitive Salary & Unidimensional View of Success
Regardless of big tech giants’ intense working hours and competitive culture, they are still the dreamlands of millions of Chinese new grads every year as they provide extremely generous salaries and compensation. Working in companies like BAT (Baidu, Alibaba, Tencent) and TMD (Toutiao/ByteDance, Meituan, Didi) for Chinese new grads is as prestigious as working for FAANG (Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix, Google) for North American students. 

Chinese society has developed a narrow view of success. Being successful is equivalent to making a lot of money. Other components such as personal development, contribution to society, happiness, etc. are slowly lost due to historical reasons. New China experienced a turbulent 30 years under Mao’s rule (1949 - 1976) when starvation, oppression, poverty, and deprivation were ubiquitous. Almost all citizens’ possessions were taken and collected. The memory of being impoverished had traumatized many. The survival mindset and the desire for material goods changed the mentality of the old generation.

After China reopened, young adults grew up in an affluent society which made them more open-minded and rebellious. Young generations are no longer convinced that they need to sacrifice their beings into the machinery of exploitation. However, they are still living through the consequences of the survival mentality as their well-being is still deteriorating and their energies are still being exploited by big companies. Young adults are questioning the inherited norms, but at the same time, they are the group of people that has the least amount of power to change the system.

## Are These Young People Lazy and Unproductive?
Many older generations criticize young adults who were born after the 80s are “degenerated” as they cannot endure hardness and are self-centered. They are “spoiled” and “wayward” kids who often refuse to work overtime, which to older generations’ minds, is being lazy. Is it true that these young people are lazy? 

Many pieces of research have proved that longer working hours do not result in higher productivity[12] but only jeopardize employees’ health[13]. Some research has even shown that working 4 days a week could increase productivity[14]. 

In addition, 30 years ago, jobs and housings were often assigned by the government. Nowadays, they are no longer guaranteed for young people. When China reopened 40 years ago, the majority of Chinese had similar starting points and the market was fairly vacant. Many great Chinese business stories started from then. As a consequence of the economic growth, the wealth gap and class barriers start to show. Young generations are bearing much more overlapping duties, facing more challenges and higher expectations. 

To give a straightforward comparison, in 1980, there were 147,000 new grads. In 2016, the number rose to 7.6 million[15]. The job market becomes more competitive with the surplus of grads. Another example is competing for government positions. Government jobs in China are known as the “Iron Rice Bowl” as they provide a stable income and working schedule. 30 years ago, government jobs were assigned to college grads, and later on, they became exam-based. In 2003, 87,000 people participated in the central government examination. In 2021, the number jumped to 1.5 million[16]. Securing a stable job is no longer an easy thing for many young people.

Despite all the challenges, young people are still trying to build a purposeful community by questioning the system and fighting against injustice. They are not lazy or unproductive, they are not convinced that performing a limited set of tasks for a long time would maximize value for anyone. 

There is more to valuing a person based only on work hours. Young people have come to realize that ideas and relational resources influence the workplace and business prospects as a whole.



References
[1]	“996.ICU.” https://996.icu (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[2]	boomerciyuan, “boomerciyuan/996ICU-company.” https://github.com/boomerciyuan/996ICU-company (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[3]	“互联网/IT 行业猝死新闻大盘点.” https://zhuanlan.zhihu.com/p/63450017 (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[4]	Global Times, “Political advisors urge supervision of tech companies’ ‘996’ overtime policy.” https://www.globaltimes.cn/page/202103/1218138.shtml (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[5]	D. Henriques, “TikTok vs Kuaishou: Hottest Short Video Platforms for New Business Opportunity,” May 22, 2020. https://www.sekkeistudio.com/blog/tiktok-kuaishou-hottest-short-video-platforms-for-new-business-opportunity/ (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[6]	Gentlemen, “Chinese eCommerce platforms in 2021: Which is the most suitable for your brand?,” Feb. 25, 2021. http://ecommercechinaagency.com/great-chinese-online-marketplaces-for-e-commerce/ (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[7]	董芷菲, “离开字节跳动的人.” http://mp.weixin.qq.com/s?__biz=Mzg5NTUyMTE3NA==&mid=2247487412&idx=1&sn=6b8cf2ca7db8277e50782adf8ca3c553&chksm=c00e574df779de5b5bc8782cdc7f3523dee97e2fcf78a3a2ad437568246071925b4769299ca5#rd (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[8]	“马云微博撰千字长文再谈996：不是简单加班、而是花时间自我提升.” https://news.mydrivers.com/1/622/622879.htm (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[9]	“Great Leap Forward.” https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Leap_Forward (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[10]	“[No title].” https://encrypted-tbn0.gstatic.com/images?q=tbn:ANd9GcR-00ZTgsDqOejd5IkpcEa9IwaL2MJA4EFWgA&usqp=CAU (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[11]	“How do Alibaba Jiang Fan P8 required to achieve full within 35 years of age as soon as possible? - Code World.” https://www.codetd.com/en/article/7655571 (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[12]	“The Research Is Clear: Long Hours Backfire for People and for Companies,” Aug. 19, 2015. https://hbr.org/2015/08/the-research-is-clear-long-hours-backfire-for-people-and-for-companies (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[13]	K. Wong, A. H. S. Chan, and S. C. Ngan, “The Effect of Long Working Hours and Overtime on Occupational Health: A Meta-Analysis of Evidence from 1998 to 2018,” Int. J. Environ. Res. Public Health, vol. 16, no. 12, Jun. 2019, doi: 10.3390/ijerph16122102.
[14]	Change Recruitment, “The Pros and Cons of a 4 Day Working Week.” https://www.changerecruitmentgroup.com/knowledge-centre/the-pros-and-cons-of-a-4-day-working-week (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[15]	“中国历年高校毕业人数（1949-2017）_柯伦_新浪博客.” http://blog.sina.com.cn/s/blog_772237630102xhb9.html (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).
[16]	“2021年国考报名人数超151万 竞争最高比3334:1.” http://www.chinagwy.org/html/xwsz/zyxw/202010/21_381468.html (accessed Apr. 29, 2021).

