# Scientific Nature of Conventional and Pop Culture Astrology 🌌


The study of astrology is scientific as it can be potentially falsified, and it is not pseudoscience. Nevertheless, the way that pop culture presents the idea of astrology has twisted the scientific nature of astrology, which leads to the consequence that astrology is not widely accepted as a science nowadays. In what follows, I will discuss the reason why astrology is scientific. I will also argue that astrology that is been presented by pop culture is not science and cannot represent the traditional study of astrology. 

According to Karl Popper’s theory of distinguishing science and non-science, he thinks that a scientific theory is falsifiable while a non-scientific theory cannot be falsified [2]. He argues that astrology is not scientific because it is too vague and cannot be falsifiable [1]. I will discuss about vagueness of astrology in the following content. Despite the vagueness, although human society is not capable to falsify astrological theories yet, they are still falsifiable in theory. Astrology is a study between human behaviour and movement of celestial bodies. To disprove an astrological theory, we need experiments that strictly restrict the conditions applied to the experiments, which is hard to attain using current technology. For example, to prove that movement of celestial bodies on the date of birth of a person can impact his/her personality, we need two people with exact same grow up condition, life experience and so on but different date of birth, which is impossible to achieve currently. However, with development of clone technology, or even parallel universe, we cannot deny that the experiment is possible to attain in the future. Thus, astrological theory is potentially falsifiable as technology progresses.

Some people would argue that astrology is a pseudoscience rather than science. Based on Paul Thagard’s criteria of pseudoscience, a theory is pseudoscientific if “it fails to progress, and practitioners make little attempt to develop the theory towards solutions of the problems, shows no concern for attempts to evaluate the theory in relation to others. [3]” First of all, astrology is progressing. Around 6000 B.C., The Sumerians noted the movements of the planets; during the Middle Ages, the development of mathematics helped to develop more accurate astrology charts [4]. Unlike other rapidly developing sciences, astrological theories progress at a slow pace, which causes people to think that astrology fails to progress. The reason why astrology develops slower than other sciences can be explained by the nature of science. The development of science starts from very basic ideas such as some fundamental mathematical and physical concepts. Advanced theories are derived from fundamental theories. For instance, the development of chemistry highly relies on the development of physics because we need physics knowledge to study particle movements. Astrology is a study related to astral movements and the universe. An in-depth understanding of planets and the universe is required for astrology study. However, our knowledge of the universe is very limited and not yet advanced enough to support astrological theories. 

Additionally, astrologists attempt to evaluate theories in relation to others. Looking at a big picture, astrology is a study that utilizes statistical knowledge to investigate the relationship between human behaviours and planets movement. Astrologists had made attempts to prove their astrological statements using scientific method. For example, in 20th century, astrologist Paul Choisnard collected certain amount of Europeans’ birth months and tried to analyze the relationship in between [5]. His conclusion was disproved since the number of samples were too small, and he didn’t consider other factors that could potentially impact the outcome. However, this demonstrates that astrologists’ attempt to prove astrological statement using scientific methods. Thus, astrology satisfies Paul Thagard’s criteria of being science rather than pseudoscience.

Although astrology should be considered as a science by itself, astrological concepts presented by modern pop culture are misleading and not scientific. The conventional study of astrology has developed a very detailed system and is much more than just Zodiac signs and fortune-telling. For example, when analyzing life of Albert Einstein, astrologist provides a very comprehensive analysis about astral movements and significant events happened to Einstein: “The major one was in 1905 – 6 when it was square to his Sun. 1905 was Einstein’s ‘annus mirabilis’ … In 1905 he published 4 papers which included in September on one the Special Theory of Relativity and in November, the one on matter and energy containing the most famous equation ever, e= mc2 [6].” Back to Karl Popper’s argument about that astrology is too vague to be falsifiable [1], the vagueness comes from the misunderstanding of the concept of astrology. Nowadays, many popular medias use astrology as an entertainment tool to attract consumers. They twist the concept of astrology from detailed astral analysis to only twelve horoscope signs, which makes the idea more acceptable and easier to understand, but at the same time, vague and inaccurate. For example, magazine “ELLE” states that Pisces daily horoscope on December 4th, 2018 is that “you’ve got a few brilliant ideas tucked up your sleeve [7].” The statement is vague and cannot be falsifiable using Karl Popper’s theory of falsification [1]. People will be cognitive biased about such statement. They tend to test such statement subjectively rather than utilizing scientific methods. Thus, astrology presented by pop culture and medias is not scientific, and it should not be considered as astrology. 

In conclusion, astrology is scientific because it is falsifiable, and it fulfills Paul Thagard’s criteria of pseudoscience. Although humans are not capable to falsify astrological theory under current condition, it still can be potentially falsified in the future. Additionally, the fact that astrologists have made attempt to prove astrological theories using scientific method and astrology progresses indicates that astrology is not pseudoscience. Nonetheless, astrological concepts introduced by pop culture are not scientific. The content is vague and cannot be a precise representation of conventional astrology. It does not fulfill Karl Popper’s theory of falsification and it is biased. Many medias manipulate and simplify the idea of astrology to make it more entertainable. To give the public a better and clearer understanding of astrology, medias should present unbiased astrological concepts rather than twisted ideas.

Reference:

[1] Popper, Karl (2004). Conjectures and Refutations: The Growth of Scientific Knowledge (Reprinted ed.). London: Routledge. 

[2] Popper, Karl (1963b). "Science as Falsification", Access:   https://web.archive.org/web/20180502201044/http://www.stephenjaygould.org/ctrl/popper_falsification.html

[3] Hansson, Sven Ove. “Science and Pseudo-Science.” Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy, Stanford University, 11 Apr. 2017, Access:
https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/pseudo-science/.


[4] “History of Astrology: A Timeline.” Astrostyle: Astrology and Daily, Weekly, Monthly Horoscopes by The AstroTwins, Access:                                        astrostyle.com/learn-astrology/history-of-astrology-timeline/.

[5] Geoffrey, Dean. “The Gauquelin Work.” Theories of Astrology (Abstract+Article), Access:                                                                                                                      www.astrology-and-science.com/g-hist2.htm.

[6] “Albert Einstein – Everyone's Favourite Relative.” Capricorn Astrology Research, 3 Apr. 2015, Access:                                                                      astrologyresearch.co.uk/albert-einstein-everyones-favourite-relative/.


[7] AstroTwins, The. “Pisces Daily Horoscope.” ELLE, ELLE, 5 Dec. 2018, Access:        www.elle.com/horoscopes/daily/a108/pisces-daily-horoscope/.